CHAPTER XIV
Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends.
It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it
did in a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced
as I was.
The name of the old man was De Lacey.
He was descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals.
His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest
distinction.
A few months before my arrival, they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris,
surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect
or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.
The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin.
He was a Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when for some reason
which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from Constantinople
to join him.
He was tried and condemned to death.
The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant.
All Paris was indignant, and it was judged that his religion and wealth, rather than
the crime alleged against him, had been the cause of his condemnation.
Felix had accidentally been present at the trial.
His horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court.
He made at that moment a solemn vow to deliver him, and then looked around for the means.
After many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly graded
window in an unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate
Mohammedan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous
sentence.
Felix visited the great at night, and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his
favor.
The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavored to rekindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises
of reward and wealth.
Felix rejected his offers with contempt.
Yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father, and who by her
gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind
that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of
Felix, and endeavored to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand
in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety.
Felix was too delicate to accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of
the event as to the consummation of his happiness.
During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant,
the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who
her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her
father who understood French.
She thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services toward her parent, and
at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
I have copies of these letters, for I found means during my residence in the hovel to
procure implements of writing, and the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha.
Before I depart, I will give them to you.
They will prove the truth of my tale.
But at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat
the substance of them to you.
Safi related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks.
Recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of Safi, who married her.
The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom,
spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced.
She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion, and taught her to aspire
to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers
of Muhammad.
This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safi, who sickened
at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem,
allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements ill-suited to the temper of her
soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue.
The prospect of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take
rank in society was enchanting to her.
The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night previous to it, he
quitted his prison and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris.
Felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister and himself.
He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting
his house under the pretense of a journey, and concealed himself with his daughter in
an obscure part of Paris.
Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyon and across Mount Sinis to Leghorn,
where the merchant had decided to wait a favorable opportunity of passing into some part of the
Turkish dominions.
Safi resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his departure, before which
time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer, and Felix
remained with them in expectation of that event.
And in the meantime, he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who exhibited toward him the
simplest and tenderest affection.
They conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with
the interpretation of looks, and Safi sang to him the divine aires of her native country.
The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers,
while in his heart he had formed far other plans.
He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the
resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power
of his deliverer if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they inhabited.
He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it
might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed.
His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris.
The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim, and spared
no pains to detect and punish his deliverer.
The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacy and Agatha were thrown into prison.
The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure.
His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed
the free air and the society of her whom he loved.
This idea was torture to him.
He quickly arranged with the Turk that if the latter should find a favorable opportunity
for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safi should remain as a border at a convent
in Leghorn, and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered
himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacy and Agatha by this proceeding.
He did not succeed.
They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which
deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native
country.
They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them.
Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk for whom he and his family endured such unheard
of oppression on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became
a traitor to good feeling and honor, and had quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly
sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.
Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I first saw
him, the most miserable of his family.
He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the mead of his virtue,
he gloried in it.
But the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved safety were misfortunes more
bitter and irreparable.
The arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.
When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant
commanded his daughter to think no more of her lover but to prepare to return to her
native country.
The generous nature of safety was outraged by this command, she attempted to expostulate
with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate.
A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment and told her hastily that he had
reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn had been divulged, and he should speedily
be delivered up to the French government.
He had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should
sail in a few hours.
He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow
at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.
When alone, safety resolved in her own mind, the plan of conduct that it would become her
to pursue in this emergency.
A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her.
Her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it.
By some papers of her father which fell into her hands, she heard of the exile of her lover,
and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided.
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination.
Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her, and a sum of money, she quitted Italy
with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey,
and departed for Germany.
She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of De Lacey, when
her attendant felt dangerously ill.
Safety nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was
left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country, and utterly ignorant of the
customs of the world.
She fell, however, into good hands.
The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound, and after
her death the woman of the house in which they lived took care that safety should arrive
in safety at the cottage of her lover.
Chapter 15 Such was the history of my beloved cottagers.
It impressed me deeply.
I learned from the views of social life which it developed to admire their virtues and to
deprecate the vices of mankind.
As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present
before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so
many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed.
But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect I must not omit a circumstance
which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.
One night during my accustomed visit to the neighboring woods where I collected my own
food and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau
containing several articles of dress and some books.
I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel.
Fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which I had acquired
at the cottage.
They consisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's Lives and the Sorrows of Werther.
The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight.
I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories whilst my friends
were employed in their ordinary occupations.
I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.
They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings that sometimes raised me to ecstasy
but more frequently sunk me into the lowest ejection.
In the Sorrows of Werther, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many
opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure
subjects that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment.
The gentle and domestic manner as it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings
which had for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among
my protectors and with the wants which were forever alive in my own bosom.
But I thought Werther himself was a more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined.
His character contained no pretension, but it sank deep.
The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder.
I did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions
of the hero whose extinction I wept without precisely understanding it.
As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition.
I found myself similar, yet at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning
whom I read and to whose conversation I was a listener.
I sympathized with and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind.
I was dependent on none and related to none.
The path of my departure was free, and there was none to lament my annihilation.
My person was hideous, and my stature gigantic.
What did this mean?
Who was I?
What was I?
Whence did I come?
What was my destination?
These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to solve them.
The volume of Plutarch's Lives, which I possessed, contained the histories of the first founders
of the ancient republics.
This book had a far different effect on me from the sorrows of Werther.
I learned from Werther's imaginations, despondency, and gloom, but Plutarch taught me high thoughts.
He elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections to admire and love the
heroes of past ages.
Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.
I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extensive country, mighty rivers and
boundless seas, but I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men.
The cottage of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human nature,
but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action.
I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.
I felt the greatest ardor for virtue rise within me, and aberrance for vice, as far
as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied
them, to pleasure and pain alone.
Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa, Salin,
and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Thesis.
The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my
mind.
Perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier burning for
glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations.
But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions.
I read it, as I'd read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true
history.
It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent god warring with
his creatures was capable of exciting.
I often referred the several situations, as their similarities struck me, to my own.
Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being in existence.
But his state was far different from mine in every other respect.
He had come forth from the hands of a god, a perfect creature, happy and prosperous,
guarded by the especial care of his creator.
He was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature,
but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him,
when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
Soon after my arrival in the hovel, I discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which
I had taken from your laboratory.
At first I had neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence.
It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your work.
This history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences.
You doubtless recollect these papers.
Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin.
The whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in
view.
The minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language which
painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible.
I sickened as I read.
Hateful day when I received life, I exclaimed in agony.
A cursed creator, why did you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in
disgust?
God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring after his own image, but my form is a filthy
type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance.
Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but I am solitary
and abhorred.
These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude.
But when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions,
I persuaded myself that when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues,
they would compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity.
Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship?
I resolved at least not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with
them which would decide my fate.
I postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance attached to its success
inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience that I
was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months could have added to
my sagacity.
Several changes in the meantime took place in the cottage.
The presence of Saffi diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also found that a greater
degree of plenty reigned there.
Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their
labors by servants.
They did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy.
Their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous.
Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was.
A cherished hope, it's true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water
or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade.
I endeavored to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few months
I resolved to undergo, and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble
in the fields of paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing
with my feelings and cheering my gloom.
Their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation.
But it was all a dream.
No Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts.
I was alone.
I remembered Adam's supplication to his Creator, but where was mine?
He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.
Autumn passed thus.
I saw with surprise and grief the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assumed the barren
and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.
Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather.
I was better fitted by my confirmation for the endurance of cold than heat.
But my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel
of summer.
When those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the cottagers.
Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
They loved and sympathized with one another, and their joys, depending on each other, were
not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them.
The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness.
My heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures, to see their sweet
looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition.
I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror.
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away.
I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest.
I required kindness and sympathy, but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place since I awoke
into life.
My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into
the cottage of my protectors.
I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was to enter the dwelling
when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the
object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me.
My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it.
I thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain the goodwill
and mediation of the old De Lacy, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors.
One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground in diffused cheerfulness,
although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk,
and the old man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage.
When his children had departed, he took up his guitar and played several mournful but
sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.
At first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness
and sadness succeeded.
At length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.
My heart beat quick.
This was the hour and moment of trial which would decide my hopes and realize my fears.
The servants were gone to a neighboring fair.
All was silent in and around the cottage.
It was an excellent opportunity, yet when I proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed
me and I sank to the ground.
Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks
which I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.
The fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination, I approached the door of their cottage.
I knocked.
Who is there?
said the old man.
Come in.
I entered.
Pardon this intrusion, I said.
I am a traveler in want of a little rest.
You would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.
Enter, said Delacy, and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants, but unfortunately
my children are from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I should find it difficult to
procure food for you.
Oh, do not trouble yourself, my kind host.
I have food.
It is warmth and rest only that I need.
I sat down, and a silence ensued.
I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to
commence the interview.
When the old man addressed me, By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman.
You are French?
No, but I was educated by a French family, and understand that language only.
I am now going to claim the protection of some friends whom I sincerely love, and of
whose favor I have some hopes.
Are they Germans?
No, they are French, but let us change the subject.
I am an unfortunate and deserted creature.
I look around, and I have no relation or friend upon earth.
These amiable people to whom I go have never seen me, and know little of me.
I am full of fears, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world forever.
Oh, do not despair.
To be friendless is indeed unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any
obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
Rely therefore on your hopes, and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.
They are kind.
They are the most excellent creatures in the world, but unfortunately they are prejudiced
against me.
I have good dispositions.
My life has been hitherto harmless, and in some degree beneficial, but if fatal prejudice
clouds their eyes, and when they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold
only a detestable monster.
That is indeed unfortunate, but if you are really blameless, cannot you undeceive them?
I am about to undertake that task, and it is on that account that I feel so many overwhelming
terrors.
I tenderly love these friends.
I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness toward them,
but they believe that I wish to injure them, and that is the prejudice which I wish to
overcome.
Where do these friends reside?
Near this spot.
The old man paused, and then continued,
If you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be
of use in undeceiving them.
I am blind, and cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which
persuades me that you are sincere.
I am poor and in exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable
to a human creature.
Excellent man, I thank you and accept your generous offer.
You raise me from the dust by this kindness, and I trust that by your aid I shall not be
driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures.
Heaven forbid, even if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation
and not instigate you to virtue.
I also am unfortunate.
I and my family have been condemned, although innocent.
Judge therefore if I do not feel for your misfortunes.
How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?
From your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed toward me.
I shall be forever grateful, and your present humanity assures me of success with those
friends whom I am on the point of meeting.
May I know their names and residence of those friends?
I paused.
This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of or bestow happiness
on me forever.
I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all
my remaining strength.
I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.
At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors.
I had not a moment to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, Now is the time.
Save and protect me.
You and your family are the friends whom I seek.
Do not you desert me in the hour of trial?
Great, God!
exclaimed the old man.
Who are you?
At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered.
Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me?
Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees
I clung.
In a transport of fury he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick.
I could have torn him limb from limb as the lion rinsed the antelope, but my heart sank
within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained.
I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted
the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.